---
layout: post
title:  "Intro Python3"
date:   2020-09-17 07:00:00 -0800
week: "1"
number: "3"
categories: "labs"
---

## Materials
* laptop
* internet access
* Jupyter Notebook


## What is Python?

[Python](https://www.python.org/) is a general-purpose, interpreted, high-level programming language. The syntax of the language has been optimized to emphasize code readability, as well as brevity.

Note: though there are multiple versions of python we will exclusively use **Python3**.


## Strings

A string is any character surrounded by quotes. Quotes must be balanced.

One of the three lines below will result in an error because it does not have balanced quotes. Take a moment to try to identify the problematic line visually and then confirm by executing each one.

```python
a = 'test'
```

```python
a = "test"
```

```python
a = "test
```

In order to declare a variable as a string one has to use quotes. The following line, then, will result in an error.

```python
a = test
```


### Manipulating Strings

Python allows for numerous manipulations to strings. Returning to the first example:

```python
a = 'test'
```

One can perform various operations with `a` to get information regarding the string `'test'`

```python
len(a)
```

```python
type(a)
```

`str` is short for string, by the way.


### Slicing Strings

Return a part of the string (referred to as "string slicing") with the following

```python
a[:3]
```

One can see what other operations are possible with `a` by typing `a.` and then hitting the TAB key. Try it in the next line.

```python
a.
```

From this list, one can type out any of the functions followed by a `?` to see a brief description of what it does.

Convert the string, contained in the variable `a`, to a capitalized version of itself

```python
a.upper()
```

Note that running `.upper()` on `a` does not permanently alter the data stored there.


```python
a
```

If one wanted to replace the lowercase version of the string at `a` with

```python
a = a.upper()
```

```python
a
```


## Integers & Floats

There are two basic types of numbers:

* integers
* floating point numbers (floats for short)

Integers are any whole number (positive or negative), floats are any number with a decimal point.

```python
a = 5
type(a)
```

```python
a = 4.0
type(a)
```

`a.[TAB]` shows what other methods `a` (the variable that now stores a floating point number) has

```python
a.
```


## Assignment Operator

In Python, `=` has a unique meaning. The previous example

```python
a = 4.0
```

means “assign 4.0” to the variable named `a`. The following returns an error

```python
5 = 6
```

because a `6` can never be assigned (or put inside) to a `5`.


## Variables

**Variables** must be assigned prior to their use, otherwise Python throws an error because it does not understand what you want it to do. Try running the following line, which references a variable (`x`) that does not currently exist.

```python
x
```

Nonetheless, variables, once assigned (and therefore established as a particular type), can be converted to other data types.

```python
a = 5
float(a)
```

Or

```python
a = 4.9
int(a)
```


## Lists

A compound data type used to group together other values. A `list` is written as a series of comma-separated values (or items) between square brackets. They do not need to be of uniform type.

```python
a = ['spam', 'eggs', 100, 1234]
a
```

Individual items in a `list` are referenced by their `index`, or location in the `list`. We can reference individual items by entering the variable and the position (counting from 0).

```python
a[0] # the first item in the list
```

```python
a[3]
```

```python
a[:2] # a list can be sliced just like a string
```

Individual items/elements in a string can be modified (or updated) as follows

```python
a[1] = 2
a
```

One can make Python determine the length (or size) of `list` by calling `len()` on it.

```python
len(a)
```


### Adding Elements to a List

#### insert

```python
h = [ 'this', 'is', 'a', 'list' ]
h
```

```python
h.insert(3, 'great')
h
```


#### append

```python
h.append('certainly')
h
```

`insert` adds an element to a `list` at index, `append` simply adds an element to the end of a `list`.


### extend

`extend` concatenates (or combines) two lists and returns a new one.

```python
h
i = [ 'the', 'best', 'list']
h.extend(i)
h
```


### index

`index` allows one to search a `list` by `value`

```python
h.index('certainly')
```


### Removing Elements From a List

There are two basic ways to remove an element from a `list`:

* `pop`
* `remove`


#### pop

```python
h = ['this', 'is', 'a', 'great', 'list', 'certainly', 'the', 'best', 'list']
h.pop()
h
```

`pop` removes and returns an item from a `list` at index. If no index is specified `pop` removes and returns the last item of a `list`.


#### remove

```python
h
h.insert(2, 'is') # insert a duplicate word
h # confirm the duplicate
```

```python
h.remove('is')
h
```

`remove` gets rid of the first occurrence of value. In the above example, the value `'is'` was removed at index 1. In order to remove the second occurrence of `'is'` one would have to run `h.remove('is')` again.
